Add Preparing to upgrade to CHT 4.0 guide (#802)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/apps/guides/updates/preparing-for-4.0.md

weight:
description: >
  Steps to ensure your CHT App will run smoothly on CHT 4.0 and later
  
---

{{% alert title="Note" %}} This guide applies to both self-hosted and Medic hosted deployments. {{% /alert %}}

## Introduction

Medic uses [Semantic Versioning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semver#Semantic_versioning) (aka "SemVer") which means that the CHT upgrade from the major 3.x version to the 4.x version denotes there are breaking changes. The key to a successful upgrade will be to understand and plan for these breaking changes. Aside from the Docker hosting infrastructure (out of scope for this prep document), the two breaking changes are around CHT Android and Enketo.

While CHT 4.0 has not been released yet, the effort to be prepared can be quite time consuming, especially for large deployments that may need to do handset upgrades in a worst case.  The sooner deployments start preparing for the upgrade, the easier it will be when it comes to the upgrade itself.  Conveniently, all device and app changes to prepare for 4.x are backwards compatible with 3.x. Prepare now, so you will be ready to upgrade sooner than later!

## CHT Android v1.0.0+ 

> This change is straightforward in that CHT 4.x no longer supports earlier versions, so deployments need to update their Play Store app. As of this writing, [CHT Android](https://github.com/medic/cht-android/) is at `1.0.4`.  Please see the [Android docs]({{< relref "core/guides/android" >}}) on how to update your app and release it.  Note that Google's Play Store can often have delays which deployments have no control over. Again, the sooner you start, the better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change is straightforward in that CHT 4.x no longer supports versions _before_ `1.0.0`, so deployments need to update their Play Store app. As of this writing, [CHT Android](https://github.com/medic/cht-android/) is at `1.0.4`.  Please see the [Android docs]({{< relref "core/guides/android" >}}) on how to update your app and release it.  Note that Google's Play Store can often have delays which deployments have no control over. Again, the sooner you start, the better.
```

Minor, but I think it would be good to be explicit about the _minimum_ supported version.

```
count|month|year|cht_android_version|
-----+-----+----+-------------------+
    7|    3|2022|v1.0.1-4           |
    7|    3|2022|v1.0.1-5           |
    4|    3|2022|v0.11.0-webview    |
   25|    2|2022|v1.0.1-5           |
    3|    2|2022|v0.11.0-webview    |
  100|    1|2022|v1.0.1-5           |
   57|    1|2022|v1.0.1-4           |
    1|    1|2022|v0.11.0-webview    |
```

### Active user counts

You can check the [monitoring API]({{< relref "apps/reference/api#monitoring" >}}) with `curl` to check active users for the last `30` days.  Remember that the users can send a telemetry report once per day, so this active user count will be less than the counts from the query above. 

We'll [use `jq` to filter](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) out the unrelated metrics.  Be sure to replace `CHT-URL-HERE` with your production CHT URL:

```shell
curl -s https://CHT-URL-HERE/api/v2/monitoring\?connected_user_interval\=30 | \
  jq '. | {connected_users}'
```

This call will show the JSON with active users for the last 30 days:

```json
{
  "connected_users": {
    "count": 80
  }
}
```

> ### Users in need up upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Users in need of upgrade
```

adj |v0.11.0-webview    |
```

A twist on this query is to remove the version filter. Do not remove the year and month filter as you will get duplicate values for users who have upgraded over time:

```sql
select 
	distinct doc#>>'{metadata,user}' as user, 
	doc#>>'{device,deviceInfo,app,version}' as cht_android_version
from 
	couchdb_users_meta 
where 
	doc#>>'{type}' = 'telemetry'  
	and doc#>>'{device,deviceInfo,app,version}' is not null 
	and doc#>>'{metadata,year}' = to_char(current_date, 'yyyy')
	and doc#>>'{metadata,month}' = to_char(current_date, 'FMMM')
```

This will give a list of every user and the version they're running as of the current month and year:

```
user            |cht_android_version|
----------------+-------------------+
moh-west-chw-1  |v1.0.1-4           |
moh-west-chw-12 |v1.0.1-4           |
moh-west-chw-14 |v1.0.1-4           |
moh-west-chw-3  |v1.0.1-4           |
moh-west-chw-3  |v1.0.1-5           |
moh-west-chw-4  |v1.0.1-5           |
moh-west-chw-5  |v1.0.1-4           |
moh-west-chw-6  |v1.0.1-5           |
moh-west-chw-7  |v1.0.1-5           |
moh-west-chw-8  |v1.0.1-4           |
adj             |v0.11.0-webview    |
```

## CHT Conf

> [CHT Conf](https://github.com/medic/cht-conf/) has been upgrade to be aware of forms written to work in CHT 3.x that may not work in CHT 4.x.  By upgrading, you will be sure to catch any forms in need up fixing when pushing to dev instances as outlined below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[CHT Conf](https://github.com/medic/cht-conf/) has been upgraded to be aware of forms written to work in CHT 3.x that may not work in CHT 4.x.  Upgrading, can help you identify forms in need of fixing when pushing to dev instances as outlined below.
```

I think we should soften this a bit since cht-conf will definitely not be able to catch _all_ the potential form issues...
